README.md, before:

# Ansible Kubernetes

Ansible playbooks for creating multiple Kubernetes clusters with kubeadm.

## Description

These playbooks allow you to create multiple Kubernetes clusters simultaneously.

In particular, you can create any number of clusters with a single master node and any number of worker nodes.

_Clusters with multiple master nodes are currently not supported._

## Playbooks

There are multiple playbooks corresponding to the different stages of the installation process:

- [`install-kubeadm.yml`](playbooks/install-kubeadm.yml): install kubeadm on all nodes
- [`init.yml`](playbooks/init.yml): run `kubeadm init` on the master nodes (installs control plane)
- [`join.yml`](playbooks/join.yml): run `kubeadm join` on the worker nodes (makes worker nodes join their master node)
- [`reset.yml`](playbooks/reset.yml): run `kubeadm reset`  on all nodes  (uninstalls Kubernetes)
- [`remove-kubeadm.yml`](playbooks/remove-kubeadm.yml): remove kubeadm from all nodes

## Inventory

An example inventory for a single Kubernetes cluster with 1 master node and 2 worker nodes looks as follows:

```ini
[all]
k8s-master ansible_host=34.65.216.227
k8s-worker-1 ansible_host=34.65.247.83
k8s-worker-2 ansible_host=34.65.192.69

[master]
k8s-master

[worker]
k8s-worker-1 master=k8s-master
k8s-worker-2 master=k8s-master
```

Note the following things:

- Each node must have the `ansible_host` variable containing a publicly accessible IP address of the node
- Each worker node must have a `master` variable containing the name of its master node

For defining multiple clusters, just add additional nodes with appropriate variables to the `[all]`, `[master]`, and `[worker]` groups (see example usage below).

## Example usage

Imagine, you want to create two Kubernetes clusters `foo` and `bar`:

- `foo`: 1 master node, 2 worker nodes
- `bar`: 1 master node, 1 worker node

Here's how to do it.

### 1. Create the inventory

Edit the `inventory.ini` file to look as follows (adapt IP addresses to your use case):

```ini
[all]
master-foo ansible_host=34.65.216.227
master-bar ansible_host=34.65.229.42
worker-1-foo ansible_host=34.65.247.83
worker-2-foo ansible_host=34.65.192.69
worker-1-bar ansible_host=34.65.38.189

[master]
master-foo
master-bar

[worker]
worker-1-foo master=master-foo
worker-2-foo master=master-foo
worker-1-bar master=master-bar

[all:vars]
ansible_python_interpreter=/usr/bin/python3
```

> Note: the `ansible_python_interpreter` variable might be necessary with the current version of Ansible if your target machines do only have Python 3, and not Python 2, installed.

### 2. Install kubeadm

Install kubeadm on all the nodes:

```bash
ansible-playbook playbooks/install-kubeadm.yml
```

### 3. Install Kubernetes on the master nodes

Run `kubeadm init` on the master nodes:

```bash
ansible-playbook playbooks/init.yml
```

This installs the Kubernetes control plane components on the master nodes and puts a kubeconfig file for each cluster in the `kubeconfig` directory in your current working directory.

You can now already access your clusters with kubectl as follows:

```bash
kubectl --kubeconfig kubeconfig/master-foo.conf get nodes
```

This should output a single node (the master node) in the `NotReady` state.

> The node is `NotReady` because there is no CNI plugin installed.

### 4. Install a CNI plugin

At this point, you [should install a CNI plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/create-cluster-kubeadm/#pod-network) in your clusters.

For example, you can install [Cilium](https://cilium.readthedocs.io/en/stable/gettingstarted/k8s-install-default/) in the `foo` cluster with:

```bash
kubectl --kubeconfig kubeconfig/master-foo.conf \
  apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/cilium/1.7.0/install/kubernetes/quick-install.yaml
```

After installing a CNI plugin, the master node should become `Ready`.

> Installing the CNI plugin right after `kubeadm init` is recommended. However, you can also first run `kubeadm join` and only after that install a CNI plugin.

### 4. Install Kubernetes on the worker nodes

Run `kubeadm join` on the worker nodes:

```bash
ansible-playbook playbooks/join.yml
```

The worker nodes should now be part of the cluster. You can verify that with:

```bash
kubectl --kubeconfig kubeconfig/master-foo.conf get nodes
```

There should now be three nodes (all in the `Ready` state if you already installed a CNI plugin).

### 5. Cleaning up

If you want to start over with the installation of Kubernetes, you can run `kubeadm reset` on all the nodes:

```bash
ansible-playbook playbooks/reset.yml
```

This uninstalls all Kubernetes components from your nodes. You can now do a fresh install of Kubernetes with the `init.yml` and `join.yml` playbooks.

If you want to uninstall kubeadm on all the nodes, you can use:

```bash
ansible-playbook playbooks/remove-kubeadm.yml
```

Commit message:

Add note about reset.yml not undoing OS settings in README

README.md, after:

# Ansible Kubernetes

Ansible playbooks for creating multiple Kubernetes clusters with kubeadm.

## Description

These playbooks allow you to create multiple Kubernetes clusters simultaneously.

In particular, you can create any number of clusters with a single master node and any number of worker nodes.

_Clusters with multiple master nodes are currently not supported._

## Playbooks

There are multiple playbooks corresponding to the different stages of the installation process:

- [`install-kubeadm.yml`](playbooks/install-kubeadm.yml): install kubeadm on all nodes
- [`init.yml`](playbooks/init.yml): run `kubeadm init` on the master nodes (installs control plane)
- [`join.yml`](playbooks/join.yml): run `kubeadm join` on the worker nodes (makes worker nodes join their master node)
- [`reset.yml`](playbooks/reset.yml): run `kubeadm reset`  on all nodes  (uninstalls Kubernetes)
- [`remove-kubeadm.yml`](playbooks/remove-kubeadm.yml): remove kubeadm from all nodes

## Inventory

An example inventory for a single Kubernetes cluster with 1 master node and 2 worker nodes looks as follows:

```ini
[all]
k8s-master ansible_host=34.65.216.227
k8s-worker-1 ansible_host=34.65.247.83
k8s-worker-2 ansible_host=34.65.192.69

[master]
k8s-master

[worker]
k8s-worker-1 master=k8s-master
k8s-worker-2 master=k8s-master
```

Note the following things:

- Each node must have the `ansible_host` variable containing a publicly accessible IP address of the node
- Each worker node must have a `master` variable containing the name of its master node

For defining multiple clusters, just add additional nodes with appropriate variables to the `[all]`, `[master]`, and `[worker]` groups (see example usage below).

## Example usage

Imagine, you want to create two Kubernetes clusters `foo` and `bar`:

- `foo`: 1 master node, 2 worker nodes
- `bar`: 1 master node, 1 worker node

Here's how to do it.

### 1. Create the inventory

Edit the `inventory.ini` file to look as follows (adapt IP addresses to your use case):

```ini
[all]
master-foo ansible_host=34.65.216.227
master-bar ansible_host=34.65.229.42
worker-1-foo ansible_host=34.65.247.83
worker-2-foo ansible_host=34.65.192.69
worker-1-bar ansible_host=34.65.38.189

[master]
master-foo
master-bar

[worker]
worker-1-foo master=master-foo
worker-2-foo master=master-foo
worker-1-bar master=master-bar

[all:vars]
ansible_python_interpreter=/usr/bin/python3
```

> Note: the `ansible_python_interpreter` variable might be necessary with the current version of Ansible if your target machines do only have Python 3, and not Python 2, installed.

### 2. Install kubeadm

Install kubeadm on all the nodes:

```bash
ansible-playbook playbooks/install-kubeadm.yml
```

### 3. Install Kubernetes on the master nodes

Run `kubeadm init` on the master nodes:

```bash
ansible-playbook playbooks/init.yml
```

This installs the Kubernetes control plane components on the master nodes and puts a kubeconfig file for each cluster in the `kubeconfig` directory in your current working directory.

You can now already access your clusters with kubectl as follows:

```bash
kubectl --kubeconfig kubeconfig/master-foo.conf get nodes
```

This should output a single node (the master node) in the `NotReady` state.

> The node is `NotReady` because there is no CNI plugin installed.

### 4. Install a CNI plugin

At this point, you [should install a CNI plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/setup/production-environment/tools/kubeadm/create-cluster-kubeadm/#pod-network) in your clusters.

For example, you can install [Cilium](https://cilium.readthedocs.io/en/stable/gettingstarted/k8s-install-default/) in the `foo` cluster with:

```bash
kubectl --kubeconfig kubeconfig/master-foo.conf \
  apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/cilium/cilium/1.7.0/install/kubernetes/quick-install.yaml
```

After installing a CNI plugin, the master node should become `Ready`.

> Installing the CNI plugin right after `kubeadm init` is recommended. However, you can also first run `kubeadm join` and only after that install a CNI plugin.

### 4. Install Kubernetes on the worker nodes

Run `kubeadm join` on the worker nodes:

```bash
ansible-playbook playbooks/join.yml
```

The worker nodes should now be part of the cluster. You can verify that with:

```bash
kubectl --kubeconfig kubeconfig/master-foo.conf get nodes
```

There should now be three nodes (all in the `Ready` state if you already installed a CNI plugin).

### 5. Cleaning up

If you want to start over with the installation of Kubernetes, you can run `kubeadm reset` on all the nodes:

```bash
ansible-playbook playbooks/reset.yml
```

This uninstalls all Kubernetes components from your nodes. It also removes the `kubeconfig` folder in the current working directory of your local machine.

You can now do a fresh install of Kubernetes with the `init.yml` and `join.yml` playbooks as shown above.

> **Caution:** the `reset.yml` playbook does **not** revert any OS-level settings made by any Kubernetes components on the nodes, such as iptables rules. This may cause issues if you reinstall Kubernetes on the same nodes. To be sure that you start with a clean slate, it's best to delete and recreate the infrastructure.

If you want to uninstall kubeadm on all the nodes, you can use:

```bash
ansible-playbook playbooks/remove-kubeadm.yml
```
